---
layout: entry
title: "Release of new ReSiE version 0.13.0"
date: 2025-11-17 15:00:00 +0100
categories: release
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

We have released version 0.13.0 of our energy system simulation engine ReSiE. This release focuses on advanced options for control and operational behaviour, particularly as it relates to busses. New options are now available for controlling the precise priorities of inputs and outputs on a bus, including switching the priorities and the allowed energy flow depending on profiles. Further changes with this version include improvements in the calculation speed of geothermal collectors, a new component to better model power networks and changes that make it easier to accurately simulate large heat storages on a multi-year timescale.

The latest release can be found [here](https://github.com/QuaSi-Software/resie/releases) and details are available on [the documentation of the QuaSi-Projekt](https://quasi-software.readthedocs.io).

<!--more-->

# Key Features

### General simulation model
* Renamed the system functions `bounded_source` and `bounded_sink` to `flexible_source` and `flexible_sink`
* Clarify some terms in the code, doc blocks and comments in regard to the use of "order of operations" and "step"
* Implemented control callbacks that can modifiy the order of operations for a timestep as well as reordering the priorities and energy flow matrix on busses (as both are necessary to ensure correct calculation)
* Changed the option to specifiy a custom order of operations in the project file. To input a custom order via field `order_of_operation` in the project file, the UAC must now be separated from the operation by a `:` instead of an empty space in order to allow UACs to contain empty spaces
* Added the option to start the output of simulation results later than the beginning of the simulation, which is for example useful to pre-heat large storage components that would otherwise start in a physically unrealistic state. To use this feature, set the simulation parameter `start_output` to a DateTime after the simulation `start`. All timesteps prio to this second start date are calculated as normal, but will not create any output.

### Control modules
* Added control module economic_control making use of the new callbacks to implement an operational strategy assigning different priorities and allowed flows depending on a given price profile and a threshold value
* Removed control module economical_discharge as it was only used for examplatory purposes and is no longer required. **Please note that this requires you to remove this control module from your project files if you have used it before.**

### General components
* Renamed BoundedSupply to FlexibleSupply and BoundedSink to FlexibleSink. **Please note that this requires you change the names of the components in your project files.**

### Geothermal collector
* Model improvements for the geothermal collector component: Changed explicit Euler formulation to implicit Euler for the calculation of heat transfer in the soil around the geothermal collector due to massive computational speed improvements. The results are very close to the former implementation.

### New component: UTIR
* Added component UTIR as a unified implementation of electric transformers, inverters and rectifiers (UTIR).

### Bus component
* The energy flow matrix of a bus can now be used to specify a custom order of each input-output connection using consecutive numbers starting from `1` in the energy flow matrix (or `0` for denied connections). This only works for single busses that are not interconnected to other busses.

### Profiles
* Added the possibility to repeat profiles using the parameter "repeat_profile" in the profile header
* Add optional simulation parameter `force_profiles_to_repeat` to force profiles to repeat, even if `repeat_profile` is not set in the profile header
